---
title: "Distinct ways of engaging with mathematics"
date: 2025-03-16
category: Thoughts and ramblings
layout: post
---

One thing I only came to realize after completing my PhD studies is that there are multiple ways to enjoy (and engage with) mathematics. For the record, I'll consider statistics a subset of mathematics.

## Modes of engagement

So, what are these distinct ways of engaging with mathematics? I'll list a few:

* Learning new concepts;
* Teaching or communicating concepts (giving lectures, participating in conferences, and so on);
* Doing research, whether that involves the process (problem-solving, abstraction) or the result (published works, contributing to a body of knowledge);
* Applying mathematics to real world systems;
* Appreciating the aesthetic beauty of certain fields in mathematics.

Each of these can take many forms. For instance, learning about the Yoneda Lemma and learning K-means clustering are quite different tasks. Each draws on different prior knowledge, invites different visualizations, and opens distinct possibilities. Moreover, these activities are not mutually exclusive. In research, for example, clear communication is crucial: not only with other experts but sometimes with a broader audience, as in the case of science/mathematics communicators.

## My personal experience

My professional life requires me to communicate statistical ideas across disciplines, a rewarding endeavor that offers many opportunities for growth. On the other hand, my motivation for this blog lies elsewhere: exploring concepts that aren’t tied to deadlines, profit, or intellectual property. In this sense, they are complementary. 

Since my undergraduate days, I’ve been fascinated by category theory and "universal constructions" (Stone dualities, universal algebras, and the like). Like many undergraduates, I was first drawn in by its role as a bridge across fields, whereas modern research often treats categories as objects in their own right. That shift doesn’t resonate with my motivations. To be clear, the field of pure category theory is fascinating; it’s just that I, personally, am not motivated by the problems within it.

That said, some relatively recent research applying category theory in other fields has caught my attention, particularly work on categorical interpretations/formulations of probability and statistics (by Tobias Fritz, Evan Patterson, and others). The calculus of programs, where programming concepts are interpreted through category theory, also seems like a fascinating subject.

## Conclusion

Ultimately, these different ways of engaging with mathematics can complement each other: sometimes directly, sometimes by coexisting in separate contexts. Personally, this blog shall serve as my venue to explore more abstract ideas (category theory, type theory, even foundational topics in statistics/data science), whereas applied ideas and concepts will be employed and used in my industry work.