---
title: "Distinct ways of enjoying mathematics"
date: 2025-03-16
category: Philosophy, thoughts and ramblings
---

# Distinct ways of enjoying mathematics

One thing that I was only able to realize after completing my PhD studies is that there are multiple ways of enjoying mathematics. For the record, I'll make the relatively uncontroversial choice of calling statistics a subset of mathematics, as my PhD degree is in the former, not the latter. For the purposes of this discussion, it is a reasonable choice.

So what are these distinct ways of enjoying mathematics? I'll list some of them:

* Learning new concepts;
* Teaching or communicating concepts;
* Doing research.

Note that each of these can be performed in a variety of ways. For instance, learning about the Yoneda Lemma and learning K-means clustering are quite distinct tasks. Each requires its own set of previous knowledge, can be visualized in distinct ways, opens distinct possibilities in other (sub) fields, and so on. Also, these are clearly not mutually exclusive: in research, for example, it is crucial to communicate your results clearly to (at least) other experts in your field, if not for the general public, as is the case of science communicators.

As a statistician working in industry, some particular ways of performing these tasks make themselves necessary. For instance, the new concepts I learn are for the most part industry-specific knowledge. That is tied to the communication of concepts, as I must be able to communicate ideas from statistics in an understandable way to people without formal training in statistics (for the most part), as well as be competent enough in their industry-specific knowledge as to not demand an explanation every 20 seconds while talking to them.

However, the reason why I've created this blog is not sharing what I do in my industry job. First of all, there is a high degree of sensibility around the intellectual property I work with. Additionally, I already have the chance to communicate the results of my work with people inside the company. The main reason I've created this blog is to be able to share what I'm able to learn (that goes beyond mathematics) on my free time. No pressure to publish, no deadlines, no financial motivation. Just learning for its own sake.

Since my undergrad days, I was fascinated with category theory and "universal constructions" (stone dualities, universal algebras and the like). As it turns out, this phenomenon is quite common among undergraduates. However, the thought of doing research in category theory didn't sound super interesting to me, as cutting-edge research in the field looks quite different than what it looked like, say, 50 years ago. Once you treat categories as objects on their own, they tend to lose their roles as bridges between other fields of mathematics. To be clear, I mean no disrespect to the category theory community: their work is fascinating. It's just that I, personally, am not motivated by problems in the field.

With that being said, some (relatively) recent research projects that utilize category theory caught my attention, particularly the work on categorical interpretations of probability and statistics (Tobias Fritz, Evan Patterson and many others). The calculus of programs, in which programming concepts are interpreted via category theory, also seem like a fascinating subject.

Ultimately, all these distinct ways of enjoying mathematics can work in complimentary ways, sometimes in a direct manner and other times by co-existing in different contexts (in my case, such contexts would be industry applications, academic research and a hobby). So, if I begin posting about category theory, type theory or similar topics (which I wish to do relatively soon), you will know that I kicked off my latest personal project. 
