---
title: "General aspects of statistical modeling"
date: 2025-09-28
category: Statistics, mathematics and computer science
layout: post
---

This year, I started reading a particular set of papers on statistical modeling. This is a topic of high interest to me as it provides conceptual clarity on the practice of applied statistics. The first such paper ([Breiman, 2001](#breiman2001)) came to my attention by accident while I was scrolling on LinkedIn, illustrating how unexpected sources can lead to constructive reading. From there, using a mix of similar papers suggested by ResearchRabbit and references from the texts themselves I was able to assemble a small list of works covering some interesting and relevant aspects of modeling (as opposed to assessments of particular methods or paradigms). 

## Breiman's paper and responses

Breiman's "Two Cultures" paper presents and criticizes a divide between two distinct approaches to statistical modeling: i) the traditional culture, heavily influenced by the foundational works of the early 20th century, and ii) the novel 'machine learning' approach pioneered by the computer science community in the 1980s. Breiman's dichotomy, even if not as strong today as 25 years ago on the community as a whole (which includes the statistical and the machine learning communities), may still exist in a weaker form. Because of that, it is relevant for researchers and practitioners to understand the nuances surrounding these topics in order to better guide their efforts depending on their particular goals.

Some of the papers in the collection consist of responses to Breiman's original paper. These include:

- Reinterpretations or clarifications of alleged conflations in Breiman's dichotomy: ([Hooker and Mentch, 2021](#hookermentch2021)) argue that Breiman conflates data models and parametric models, whereas ([Pearl, 2021](#pearl2021)) interpret Breiman's comparison as one between interpretable vs. uninterpretable (descriptive) models. 
- A "one culture" view, either as a characterization of the developments in the field of statistics since the publication of Breiman's paper ([Yu and Barter, 2020](#yubarter2020)), or as a goal that's worth the pursuit ([Bühlmann, 2021](#buhlmann2021)).
- Overviews on statistical modeling, either in a compact, concise presentation ([Raper, 2020](#raper2020)) or as a more detailed and thorough review ([Shmueli, 2010](#shmueli2010)).

The items in the lists presented in this post are not mutually exclusive: some works will ponder on multiple aspects from one (or various) list(s). 

## Related work

Another kind of work in the list consists of papers that consider general aspects of statistical modeling, being devoted to lessons learned in the field or characteristics of models, such as simplicity. On the other hand, they were not directly written as responses to Breiman's paper.

- Discussions of model simplicity (Occam's Razor) and its tradeoffs in the KDD context ([Domingos, 1999](#domingos1999)).
- Comparisons between scientific and statistical method ([MacKay and Oldford, 2000](#mackayoldford2000)).
- Key aspects of machine learning practice ([Domingos, 2012](#domingos2012)).
- Proposal of novel frameworks for statistical modeling ([Yu and Kumbier, 2020](#yukumbier2020)).

A further major theme that emerges is causality. In fact, this topic was covered by ([Pearl, 2021](#pearl2021)), already referenced above.

- ([Freedman, 1999](#freedman1999)) discusses and recontextualizes historical works that entered the causal territory, including the classical cholera studies by John Snow.
- ([Pearl and Mackenzie, 2018](#pearlmackenzie2018)) is a book aimed at general audiences that provides a conceptual introduction to Pearl's Causal Hierarchy (PCH). 

Going back to classical statistics, a topic that hasn't been mentioned yet (among many) is simulation studies. The last category here covers this topic and contains a single paper: ([Morris et al., 2018](#morriswhitecrowther2019)), which proposes a framework for rigorous planning and execution of simulation studies.

## Some additional thoughts

Before concluding this post, I will point out that multiple works are missing. This might be obvious for the causality group, as my list doesn't include two relevant works by Pearl from 2009 (a book and a technical report), but even my list of responses to Breiman is not exhaustive. I made the conscious choice to only reference in this post works that I did actually read, leaving others to a future post. Nevertheless, this compilation of papers and books explores a few general, but key areas of statistical modeling. They can be overlooked by the data science community as a whole but contain very important lessons to any practitioner in the field.

Breiman's paper and the responses to it provide a very informative summary of what happened in the modeling communities in the last 50 years, and how they have (or have not) merged. Following the order above, papers that deal with general aspects of statistical modeling (and eventually propose frameworks for statistical practice) offer a bird's-eye view of modeling, particularly relevant to those of us who do get caught in the details and nuances of particular models and/or problems.

On the topic of causality, the research done by Pearl and collaborators is a robust mathematical framework that allows us to answer questions about cause and effect that have long preoccupied philosophers and scientists and have been neglected by classical statistical theory. As the last category in this post, simulation studies constitute a very rich topic which is in my experience overlooked: not in the sense that they are absent from the literature, but in the sense that they are often not performed with the level of care and thought that *we* ought to devote. Why are simulation studies done poorly? Some potential reasons (this is a discussion for another time) are a lack of standards, difficulty in design and neglect of simulation studies in favor of mathematical theorems (such as asymptotic results).

A topic that was left out of the list presented above but is related nonetheless is classical statistical theory, including hypothesis testing (and statistical significance), confidence intervals, Bayesian statistics and similar topics. This may be covered in a future post.

## Conclusion

Each of these perspectives pushes us to rethink not just how we build models, but what we consider the purpose and scope of modeling itself. The topics covered by this compilation of works provide a lot of food for thought and are worth looking into for anyone interested in statistical modeling.

## References

<a id="breiman2001">Breiman, L. (2001).</a>  
Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (with comments and a rejoinder by the author).  
*Statistical Science*, 16(3), 199–231.

<a id="buhlmann2021">Bühlmann, P. (2021).</a>  
One Modern Culture of Statistics: Comments on Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures (Breiman, 2001b).  
*Observational Studies*, 7(1), 33–40.

<a id="domingos1999">Domingos, P. (1999).</a>  
The role of Occam's razor in knowledge discovery.  
*Data mining and knowledge discovery*, 3(4), 409–425.

<a id="domingos2012">Domingos, P. (2012).</a>  
A few useful things to know about machine learning.  
*Communications of the ACM*, 55(10), 78–87.

<a id="freedman1999">Freedman, D. (1999).</a>  
From association to causation: some remarks on the history of statistics.  
*Journal de la société française de statistique*, 140(3), 5–32.

<a id="hookermentch2021">Hooker, G. & Mentch, L. (2021).</a>  
Bridging Breiman's Brook: From Algorithmic Modeling to Statistical Learning.  
*Observational Studies*, 7(1), 107–125.

<a id="mackayoldford2000">MacKay, R. J. & Oldford, R. W. (2000).</a>  
Scientific method, statistical method and the speed of light.  
*Statistical Science*, 15(3), 254–278.

<a id="morriswhitecrowther2019">Morris, T. P., White, I. R., & Crowther, M. J. (2019).</a>  
Using simulation studies to evaluate statistical methods.  
*Statistics in medicine*, 38(11), 2074–2102.

<a id="pearlmackenzie2018">Pearl, J. & Mackenzie, D. (2018).</a>  
*The Book of Why: The New Science of Cause and Effect.*  
Basic Books.

<a id="pearl2021">Pearl, J. (2021).</a>  
Causally Colored Reflections on Leo Breiman's "Statistical Modeling: The Two Cultures" (2001).  
*Observational Studies*, 7(1), 187–190.

<a id="raper2020">Raper, S. (2020).</a>  
Leo Breiman's “Two Cultures”.  
*Significance*, 17(1), 34–37.

<a id="shmueli2010">Shmueli, G. (2010).</a>  
To Explain or to Predict?  
*Statistical Science*, 25(1), 289–310.

<a id="yubarter2020">Yu, B. & Barter, R. (2020).</a>  
The Data Science Process: One Culture.  
*International Statistical Review*, 88(51), S83–S86.

<a id="yukumbier2020">Yu, B. & Kumbier, K. (2020).</a>  
Veridical Data Science.  
*Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences*, 117(8), 3920–3929.





