---
title: "A Non-philosopher's Introduction to Wittgenstein"
date: 2025-10-13
category: Wittgenstein
layout: post
---

I have been reading Wittgenstein's philosophy (primary and secondary literatures) for about 5 years, as his philosophical approach has piqued my interest in a way that no other approach was able to. To make it very clear, I have no qualifications in philosophy. Therefore, what follows should be read less as authoritative commentary and more as a reflective introduction from an interested outsider. What I hope to achieve with this post is a basic overview of Wittgenstein's philosophy for someone who doesn't know a thing about Wittgenstein. Or, in other words, myself 5 years ago.

## My encounter with Wittgenstein

In my formative years, I did as much reading as one is expected to do in school. I enjoyed the process as a whole, despite the eventual book I found obnoxiously boring. My readings were primarily fiction, although I did pick up some non-fiction here and there, like Thus Spoke Zarathustra ([Nietzsche and Kaufmann, 1995](#nietzschekaufmann1995)) (no, I didn't understand any of it). It would take me around a decade and a pandemic to make me go back to my reading habit.

At first, my reading regimen was quite broad, consisting mostly of books from the *Very Short Introductions* series. Some of the books I read contained philosophical ideas, and some of those ideas seemed quite strange to me. The most emblematic case that I can remember is *Consciousness: A Very Short Introduction*. My reaction wasn't directed at any one idea or author (including Susan Blackmore, the author of the book itself), but to the framing of the subject. To put it in very crude terms, it seemed odd to me that philosophers could uncover the deep mysteries of the universe by arranging language in the right way. My issue wasn't that language seemed to be *necessary*, but that it was *sufficient*.

Despite not being able to express my issues with the approach persistent throughout the book, and other places, something was deeply *unsatisfying* to me. The method couldn't be characterized as an empirical investigation like those from the natural sciences, nor a purely formal endeavor like that of mathematics and logic. On the other hand, getting to know more about Wittgenstein's method allowed me to express (or find the expression of) this unsatisfaction. One such example comes from ([Hardman, 2025](#hardman2025)):

"Many philosophers do advance explanations, through proposing philosophical theories. To take just one example, with respect to the relationship between conscious experience and brain activity, there are a raft of incompatible materialist, interactionist, epiphenomenalist and protopanpsychist theories that vigorously compete for attention. However, unlike in the sciences, these theories are not abductively inferred from observations nor (could be) empirically tested using the hypothetico-deductive method but are derived through rational argument from purported acceptable premises. Herein lies the problem."

Another comes from ([Baker and Morris, 2008](#bakermorris2008)):

"To a considerable extent, Wittgenstein’s philosophy involves negotiations with others (his readers and interlocutors, real or imaginary) about pictures, *Auffassungen*, conceptions. This is liable to go deeply against the grain of *soi-disant* analytic philosophers. They relish the clash of steel on steel; the adversarial model of argument, the possibility of proving something,
especially the possibility of proving other philosophers to be wrong. They have a definite ideal of philosophical argument, as case-building."

In both examples, we can see some aspects of how traditional (analytical) philosophy is typically conducted. This kind of insight can be achieved if one contrasts this approach to philosophy with other approaches (like the continental, or the therapeutic).

I don't exactly remember in which book I saw a quotation or reference to Wittgenstein, but it made me curious. One introduction to (the later) Wittgenstein that really resonated with me came from a YouTube video titled "Introduction to Wittgenstein (His Later Philosophy)" by youtuber *Why Alexander Y*. In fact, it is likely better as an introduction to a general audience than this blog post can hope to be. Either way, one thing led to the next and not long after watching this video I read the *Philosophical Investigations* ([Wittgenstein et al., 2010](#wittgensteinhackerschulte2010)). The book puzzled me, but with the help of the secondary literature I was able to grasp the later Wittgenstein. Since then, I've never stopped reading about his philosophy, which can be characterized by eras (the early, middle and late Wittgenstein) and by interpretative approaches (resolute vs. irresolute, doctrinal, elucidatory, therapeutic).
 
## Three Wittgensteins, multiple readings

Roughly speaking, Wittgenstein as a philosopher can be divided in three phases:
- The early Wittgenstein, who authored of the *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* ([Wittgenstein and Ogden, 1990](#wittgensteinogden1990)). This philosophical work, Wittgenstein's PhD thesis, consists in a very strict and abstract theory of language and how it relates to the world. Despite the surface-level similarities between this work and the works of logical positivists around the time the *Tractatus* was released, there is already a striking uniqueness in the way Wittgenstein criticizes metaphysics and philosophy itself.
- The middle Wittgenstein, who is much closer to the later than the earlier philosopher. One reason for this is that while the early Wittgenstein sparsely provides examples or looks at language as it is used in practice, the later Wittgenstein devotes a lot of time to actual language speakers and their activities. In other words, it's a move from theorizing about logical forms to describing language-games. The writings and lectures of the middle Wittgenstein set up the kinds of investigations as well as the methodological style that the later Wittgenstein dedicates himself to, as in the middle philosophy Wittgenstein realizes that the *Tractatus* is not "the whole story". However, there are still some aspects of the early philosopher in the middle's lectures and writings.
- The later Wittgenstein of the *Investigations*, finally, no longer advocates for certain theories of language and instead turns the investigation on its head by proposing a therapeutical, non-theoretical approach to philosophy. Such an approach is a very powerful proposition of what philosophy can be, but it comes with a set of particularities:
  - no theses: "If someone were to advance theses in philosophy, it would never be possible to debate them, because everyone would agree to them."
  - no controversies: "Philosophy only states what everyone concedes to it."
  - the end of philosophy: "The real discovery is the one that enables me to break off philosophizing when I want to."

There are multiple ways to interpret the early and the later Wittgenstein. On the early work, the resolute vs. irresolute debate is centered about how to interpret the *Tractatus* in light of 6.54:

"My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out
through them, on them, over them. (He must so to speak throw away the ladder, after he has climbed up on it.) 

He must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world rightly."

Are the remarks in the text then pure nonsense or are there philosophical insights to be extracted? The resolute readings go with the first option. Regarding the later Wittgenstein, readings range from doctrinal (such an interpreter would say that Wittgenstein does propose a use theory of meaning, a private language argument, and so on) to therapeutic (Wittgenstein method is about treating philosophical diseases, not with theses and arguments but with alternative pictures, showing the fly the way out of the fly-bottle). In the next section I will give a summary of what my (current) views are.

## My perspectives on Wittgenstein's development

Regarding the *Tractatus*, I have not read the secondary literature as much as the secondary literature on the later Wittgenstein. There, readings that resonate with me are the therapeutic/liberatory; If I had to pin down my own perspective on Wittgenstein it would be somewhere between ([Baker and Morris, 2008](#bakermorris2008)) and ([Read, 2020](#read2020)), but not neglecting ([McGinn, 2013](#mcginn2013)), ([Kuusela, 2008](#kuusela2008)) and ([Fogelin, 2020](#fogelin2020)), among other works.

I tend to think that Wittgentenstein's change between the early and later work is one of method, not *telos*. His goal with philosophy (as he characterizes it) is, in my view, a two-part endeavor.

- I: One comes to recognize the nonsense in trying to say "what cannot be said" — that is, one sees the limits of sense.
- II: In grasping this, one no longer feels compelled to utter philosophical (dogmatic, theoretical) propositions, and thus “sees the world aright” — that is, one attains clarity and peace.

Such a view, I think, can be defended if particular remarks are brought forward. In the *Tractatus*, some of them would be 3.324, 4.112, 6.53 and 6.54. In the *Investigations*, some of them would be 5, 133, 309. There are others, but as the objective of this post is a light introduction and not an exhaustive overview of Wittgenstein's philosophy, a few illustrative remarks are sufficient. These remarks show the confusions that his method aims to dissolve, in one way or another.

What I see as changing in this objective is the meaning of "what cannot be said". In the early work, it means ineffable truths (what can only be shown and not said, or the mystical, such as statements of ethics and metaphysics), while on the latter, it means metaphysical statements (statements about necessity, dogmas, etc., not necessarily statements *of* metaphysics), but only if the interlocutor suffers from confusions caused by such statements *and* concedes to the therapist's point.

Regarding the methodological shift, in the *Tractatus* Wittgenstein proposes a highly dogmatic theory of language. Inside the theory, Wittgenstein asserts (I) multiple times (4.1212 and 5.6 for example), culminating in 6.53. Then, applying 6.53 to the *Tractatus* itself leads Wittgenstein to 6.54, which is the jump from (I) to (II). Ultra-theorizing (in the sense that it allows one to limit the bounds of language from within language) is the way Wittgenstein finds to make the jump. By leading his theory to self-deconstruction Wittgenstein shows (II). I think this 'showing' is done in a multitude of ways: as a logical consequence (of the theory constructed until that point), an ethical realization (given the stated role of philosophy), or a performative act within language (something like a self-destructive, theatrical version of the thesis-synthesis-antithesis model).

On the other hand, in the later work Wittgenstein finds that one does not need to take the ultra-dogmatic approach to jump from (I) to (II). One needs instead to work on one's will and recognize that the discomforts brought by traditional philosophy can be dissolved by philosophical treatment, as the source of our confusion is "being held captive by a picture". Then, by treating philosophical problems like diseases, one is able to find the liberating word and stop philosophizing when one wants to.

## Final reflections

If you haven't heard of Wittgenstein's philosophy before, I hope this post was enticing enough to make you read people way more qualified than I on these matters, the same way I was enticed by sparse references or YouTube videos on Wittgenstein. Among many non-philosophers (and that includes experts in some scientific fields such as physics) I can sense an attitude of dismissiveness ("philosophy is all about semantics", "what difference does it make if theory A or theory B is correct?", "metaphysics is nonsensical"), and I genuinely think there is a kernel of truth there. Even some comments by Wittgenstein himself could be said by such a non-philosopher today ([Wittgenstein et al., 1984](#wittgensteinwrightnyman1984)):

"Reading the Socratic dialogues, one has the feeling: what a frightful waste of time! What's the point of these arguments that prove nothing & clarify nothing."

However, I believe that Wittgensteinian philosophy allows one to criticize philosophy while still respecting it: an example is given by Section 6.6 of ([Kuusela, 2008](#kuusela2008)), or by ([Read, 2020](#read2020)):

"Wittgenstein took Augustine
...to be as deep a thinker as there was;
...to be a philosopher whose approach anticipated Wittgenstein’s own in real and important respects"

It also avoids many of the pitfalls that made logical positivism (and its revival among anti-philosophical scientists in contemporary times) collapse in the 20th century. Finally, I do believe that Wittgenstein (with the help of many interpretative minds such as the later Baker, Kuusela, Read, among others) is a common-man philosopher (as opposed to a philosopher's philosopher), and that it would benefit many people to have a grasp of what Wittgenstein proposed as philosophy.

As for myself, by reading more about Wittgenstein's method and practice, I hope that this blurry snapshot of my understanding of Wittgenstein crystallizes into a solid mental map, so to speak. Either way, I'm glad to know *something* about the philosophy of this brilliant man, and I'll be writing more about my readings on him and his method.

## References

<a id="bakermorris2008"> Baker, G. & Morris, K. (2008).</a>  
*Wittgenstein's Method: Neglected Aspects.*  
Wiley.

<a id="fogelin2020"> Fogelin, R. (2020).</a>  
*Taking Wittgenstein at His Word: A Textual Study.*  
Princeton University Press.

<a id="hardman2025">Hardman, D. (2025).</a>  
Wittgenstein's Method is Simple: ‘Describe Language-games!’  
*Philosophical Investigations*, 48(2), 222–240.

<a id="kuusela2008"> Kuusela, O. (2008).</a>  
*The Struggle Against Dogmatism: Wittgenstein and the Concept of Philosophy.*  
Harvard University Press.

<a id="mcginn2013"> McGinn, M. (2013).</a>  
*The Routledge Guidebook to Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations.*  
Routledge.

<a id="nietzschekaufmann1995"> Nietzsche, F. W., & Kaufmann, W. (1995).</a>  
*Thus spoke Zarathustra: A book for all and none.*  
Modern Library.

<a id="read2020"> Read, R. (2020).</a>  
*Wittgenstein’s Liberatory Philosophy: Thinking Through His Philosophical Investigations.*  
Routledge.

<a id="wittgensteinhackerschulte2010"> Wittgenstein, L. & Hacker, P. & Schulte, J. (2010).</a>  
*Philosophical Investigations.*  
Wiley.

<a id="wittgensteinogden1990"> Wittgenstein, L. & Ogden, C. (1990).</a>  
*Tractatus Logico-philosophicus.*  
Routledge.

<a id="wittgensteinwrightnyman1984"> Wittgenstein, L. & Wright, G. & Nyman, H. (1984).</a>  
*Culture and Value.*  
University of Chicago Press.