---
title: "Comments on the Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus"
date: 2025-10-21
category: Wittgenstein
layout: post
---

I’m currently studying Wittgenstein’s philosophy through both primary and secondary sources, focusing on the relationship between his early and later approaches. This blog post in particular aims to share some thoughts on the *Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus* ([Wittgenstein and Ogden, 1990](#wittgensteinogden1990)). I wish to show that the *Tractatus* may be read as executing a two-step program that reappears (in transformed form) in Wittgenstein’s later thought, thus constituting a teleological unity between the otherwise distinct endeavors of the early and later Wittgenstein.

## Wittgenstein's Telos in general terms

To begin, I'd like to revisit Wittgenstein's view on the aim of philosophy from my interpretation. From my previous blog post on Wittgenstein ([Fernandes, 2025](#fernandes2025)), that can be seen as a two-part endeavor: 

- I: One comes to recognize the nonsense in trying to say "what cannot be said", that is, one sees the limits of sense.
- II: In grasping this, one no longer feels compelled to utter philosophical (dogmatic, donctrinal) propositions, and thus “sees the world aright”, that is, one attains clarity and peace.

As mentioned earlier, I see this as a common objective (that is, the intended end of philosophical activity) for the early and the later Wittgenstein. In this post, I'll make a brief attempt to justify this two-part reading (of the *Tractatus* specifically) based on a few key remarks.

Before that, it's important to note that, despite Wittgenstein not using the word *telos* in his writings, he does talk about what the 'correct' method of philosophy is (in the early work) and what the aim of philosophy is (in the later work). Therefore, Wittgenstein is not merely working within a received philosophical paradigm; he is proposing a radical new way of doing philosophy. 

To ground this interpretation, I will now turn to several remarks from the *Tractatus* that exemplify how Wittgenstein enacts the two-step movement: from the recognition of nonsense (I) to the ensuing clarity and peace via a change of attitude (II).

## An examination of key remarks

In this section, I will point to a few key remarks on the *Tractatus* and briefly mention how they fit into the *telos* delineated above.

### 4.003  

*Most propositions and questions, that have been written about philosophical matters, are not false, but senseless [...] Most questions and propositions of the philosophers result from the fact that we do not understand the logic of our language.*

Here, Wittgenstein claims that by recognizing that philosophical propositions (or, at least most of them) are senseless (products of a misunderstanding of the logic of language) one comes to see that the philosophical problems dissolve. This fits within (I), by describing *why* we are tempted to speak nonsense.

### 4.112

*The object of philosophy is the logical clarification of thoughts. Philosophy is not a theory but an activity. A philosophical work consists essentially of elucidations [...] Philosophy should make clear and delimit sharply the
thoughts which otherwise are, as it were, opaque and blurred.*

In this remark, Wittgenstein states *how* we may achieve (I): by practicing a philosophical method that renounces theory-building in favor of the activity of elucidating unclear propositions.

### 4.1212

*What can be shown cannot be said.*

This remark, albeit quite short, leads us to (I) by asserting why certain propositions are nonsensical: because they attempt to cross the boundaries of sense and *say* what can (only) be *shown*. 

### 5.6-5.62

*The limits of my language mean the limits of my world. Logic fills the world: the limits of the world are also its limits. We cannot therefore say in logic: This and this there is in the world, that there is not [...] In fact what solipsism means, is quite correct, only it cannot be said, but it shows itself.*

These remarks function as a "final" push towards (I), by relating the limits of language, logic, and the world, as well as expanding on 4.1212. As an example, he points out solipsism (at another point he points towards ethics), which, from within the limits of language, gestures at the point where showing replaces saying.

### 6.53-6.54

*The right method of philosophy would be this. To say nothing except what can be said, i.e. the propositions of natural science, i.e. something that has nothing to do with philosophy: and then always, when someone else wished to say something metaphysical, to demonstrate to him that he had given no meaning to certain signs in his propositions [...] My propositions are elucidatory in this way: he who understands me finally recognizes them as senseless, when he has climbed out through them, on them, over them [...] He must surmount these propositions; then he sees the world rightly.*

Given all the theoretical groundwork established in the *Tractatus* up to that point (regarding logic, language, the world, philosophy and the natural sciences), 6.53 expresses (I) by pointing to what the *correct* method of philosophy is. Then, 6.54 applies the conclusion stated in 6.53 towards the *Tractatus* itself: certain signs in the propositions were given no meaning (and could not be given meaning, as they refer to things that can only be shown). It does not merely state (II) but shows it, enacting its own dissolution in a performative self-deconstruction.

This performative reading contrasts with traditional 'ineffability' interpretations, which hold that the Tractatus gestures toward unsayable metaphysical truths. Rather, it aligns (at least in spirit) with so-called 'resolute' interpretations (e.g. Diamond, Conant), according to which the work aims not to provide an ineffable theory but to cure the reader of the very impulse to utter it. However, I think there may be similarities between this reading and ineffability interpretations, as well as dissimilarities between it and resolute ones. This will be discussed in a future opportunity.

### 7

*Whereof one cannot speak, thereof one must be silent.*

The final remark of the *Tractatus* completes the enterprise of showing (II) by punctuating the performative act of self-deconstruction of the text, performing the silence it prescribes.

## Conclusions

There are many aspects of the text that were not touched here (for reasons of time and of my own limited competence on the subject): 

- Can we divide it into sections (the picture theory, logic, probability, and so on), and if so, does that help one understand the text better? 
- Is the self-deconstruction act performed only at the end (6.54) or does it happen iteratively throughout the text?
- Does the *Tractatus* gesture at some "ideal" language or does it talk about language in general? If the former, why doesn't Wittgenstein attempt to create such an ideal language, only describing it in abstract terms?

For my own purposes, it was perhaps more productive to focus on how Wittgenstein achieves what I take to be his objective with philosophy, to contrast it with his approach on the later work. 

This interpretive lens may allow us to see what is common between the early and later Wittgenstein, the two steps outlined and suggested above. These may ultimately connect with Wittgenstein’s later claim that ‘What has to be overcome is not a difficulty of the intellect but of the will,’ a connection I intend to explore elsewhere.

## References

<a id="fernandes2025"> Fernandes, H. (2025).</a>  
*A Non-philosopher's Introduction to Wittgenstein.*  
Personal Blog.
<a href="https://hilariofernandes.github.io/wittgenstein/2025/10/13/anpitw.html">
https://hilariofernandes.github.io/wittgenstein/2025/10/13/anpitw.html</a><br><br>

<a id="wittgensteinogden1990"> Wittgenstein, L. & Ogden, C. (1990).</a>  
*Tractatus Logico-philosophicus.*  
Routledge.