---
title: "On Wittgenstein's Blue and Brown Books (part I)"
date: 2026-01-11
category: Wittgenstein
layout: post
---

Continuing my journey through Wittgenstein's works, this post is dedicated to the Blue and Brown Books ([Wittgenstein and Docherty, 1991](#wittgensteindocherty1991)). This is a work much closer to the PI ([Wittgenstein et al., 2010](#wittgensteinhackerschulte2010)) than to the *Tractatus* ([Wittgenstein and Ogden, 1990](#wittgensteinogden1990)), but as the preface comments, Wittgenstein's thought is not fully transitioned to what is expressed in the PI.

However, I still think that many "methodological" remarks and excerpts can be illustrative of the therapeutic/liberatory approach of the later philosophy as proposed in the PI, without contradicting it. Regarding what counts or doesn't count as a methodological remark, I do not think there are definitive separations (and it isn't my aim to propose demarcation criteria), as Wittgenstein's later texts are fluid and not structured as a text in traditional philosophy is expected to be. Therefore, some chosen excerpts may contain examples.

I have organized the Blue Book into a collection of such methodological remarks, and this structure will be reflected in this blog post. Each section below will be dedicated to an excerpt. We shall then discuss what aspects are being brought to light by said excerpt, possibly linking it with the two-step approach ([Fernandes, 2025](#fernandes2025)) or the earlier philosophy of Wittgenstein.

The excerpt numbering will work in the following way: distinct numbers correspond to excerpts separated by text (e.g. 1 and 2), whereas the same number will correspond to contiguous excerpts, which form a block of excerpts included here (e.g. 4a and 4b). As there are too many excerpts for a single blog post, this post will be divided into two parts.

## 1. Language in old and new contexts

This excerpt begins in pp. 9 with "To the statement [...]" and ends in pp. 10 with "[...] has yet to be explained to us".

Here, Wittgenstein considers a particular aspect of the case of the diviner who says "I feel in my hand that the water is three feet under the ground". The diviner might claim that we know what such a statement means since we know what each part means. However, as Wittgenstein claims, since the full sentence combines each part in ways that are unusual in ordinary language, the sense of the sentence is yet to be given.

Even though the context of this excerpt is meaning and use in language, I feel one can treat this as a methodological remark aimed at traditional philosophy's tendency to take words for granted (e.g. 'causality', 'free will', 'knowledge') without acknowledging their numerous uses and the contexts in which these words are used sensefully (even when these words are explicitly defined, they are naturally defined using other words, and the same criticism applies).

One relevant point is that Wittgenstein concedes that the diviner can give a perfectly good answer by claiming he associates a certain feeling with certain words or numbers. Of course, experience may or may not agree with the diviner's predictions: the point is that even if the full sentence doesn't have an immediate sense, it may be given one by its locutor. This is in strong agreement with the liberatory approach: ordinary language is not constraining or prohibiting; it only requires us to be aware of what we say.

## 2. Necessity and alternative pictures

This excerpt begins in pp. 12 with "On another occasion [...]" and ends in pp. 13 with "[...] illustrates the method of philosophy"

The excerpt is in the context of learning words and understanding orders. The main methodological takeaway here is that Wittgenstein's method at this point concerns proposing *alternative* pictures, in order for our interlocutor to see that certain things *need not* happen, or are not *necessary*. This prompts other questions (e.g. "what if our interlocutor rejects our proposed alternative picture?"), some of which are answered later in the Blue Book. Others, however, are answered only in the PI.

## 3. The philosopher and the scientist

This excerpt begins in pp. 23 with "It isn't wrong [...]" and ends in pp. 23 with "[...] of those which we are accustomed to."

Here, Wittgenstein goes into an in-depth analysis the "unconscious toothache" example introduced in the previous paragraph. This term is a new (even now) or unusual form of expression that seems to describe something *in principle* impossible to exist, due to analogies we may have in mind involving the words 'unconscious' and 'pain'. Therefore, we may take the new expression with either "the puzzlement of philosophy", or to treat it as a "stupendous discovery". A scientist might discover this empirical phenomenon of unconscious toothache (and justify it), but the philosopher will not be satisfied.

Wittgenstein claims that one possibility of clearing this up is to investigate how the words in the sentence are used in various contexts, and see which analogies hold. Additionally, constructing new notations may break the spell of the ones we are accustomed to.

One potential contemporary example of the clash between philosophers and scientists is the free-will topic in philosophy and neuroscience. However, I lack the necessary knowledge to enter this topic, merely leaving it as a potential connection.

## 4a. Criteria and symptoms

This excerpt begins in pp. 24 with "Let us introduce [...]" and ends in pp. 25 with "[...] a calculus proceeding according to exact rules."

In this excerpt Wittgenstein introduces two terms: *criteria* are phenomena that characterize, by definition, a certain word. On the other hand, *symptoms* are phenomena that empirically coincide, in one way or another, with the defining criteria of a word. He also makes the point that it's not necessarily a lack of clarity to use names/words without deciding which phenomena are the criteria and which are the symptoms. He does this in the context of doctors and the names of diseases, but I do think this remark was intended in a more general (even methodological) way: the framework of criteria and symptoms can be applied to terms such as 'free-will', 'consciousness' and others. Wittgenstein concludes this excerpt by saying that this apparent (but not actual) lack of clarity stems from the dynamic and fluid nature of language: it doesn't follow strict rules, despite the tendency in philosophy to treat language as if it did (or to compare it with systems with strict rules).

In conclusion, the urge to classify criteria vs. symptoms is itself often a philosophical temptation.

## 4b. Language as a strict calculus

This excerpt begins in pp. 25 with "This is a very one-sided [...]" and ends in pp. 26 with "[...] just this attitude towards language."

Continuing the discussion of language as a strict calculus, Wittgenstein notices that in practice (meaning in ordinary contexts) it is rare that language is used following strict rules, like in science and mathematics. Rather, our relation with language is analogous to that of children playing with a ball: they make up rules as they go, going from one set of rules to the next in a fluid manner. The philosophical puzzles (that Wittgenstein attempts to cure us from) arise from that view of language as a calculus with strict rules.

## 4c. What is time, and measuring it

This excerpt begins in pp. 26 with "Consider as an example [...]" and ends in pp. 26 with "[...] one word can have two meanings."

Here, Wittgenstein considers the questions "What is time?" and "How is it possible that one should measure time? For the past [...] is gone by; and the future [...] has not yet come. And the present [...] has no extension" asked by Augustine and others. 

The first question, despite its appearance of asking for a definition, is a manifestation of mental discomfort that asks for a clarification on the grammar of a word. The unclarity of the grammar of certain words is what causes us discomfort, unlike words like 'chair'.

Regarding the second question, the puzzlement may arise from the attempt to use an analogy between two uses of 'to measure': one used in 'to measure time', and the other in 'to measure length'. The fascination that this analogy gives us stops us from seeing clearly how the expression 'to measure' can have more than one grammar. The way to solve this puzzle is to carefully compare how this expression is used in each context.

## 4d. Linguistic prejudices manifested as questions asking for definitions

This excerpt begins in pp. 26 with "Now it is clear [...]" and ends in pp. 27 with "[...] the word is actually used."

This excerpt brings a similar question to light and additional aspects that clarify the related philosophical confusions. The question is "What is knowledge?", asked by Socrates. Similarly to "What is time?", this question seems to ask for a strict (formal) definition. The act of asking such a question and requiring a strict definition as an answer manifests a prejudice towards ordinary language: "it appears we don't know what it means, and that therefore, perhaps, we have no right to use it." The way Wittgenstein suggests to dissolve the problem is to note that there is no single exact usage of the word. While we can postulate multiple exact usages, we shouldn't expect any single one of them to match exactly how the world is actually used.

## 4e. Looking for (strict) definitions of words

This excerpt begins in pp. 27 with "The man who is [...]" and ends in pp. 27 with "[...] which forms of expression exert upon us."

I can't think of a way to improve the beginning of this excerpt: "The man who is philosophically puzzled sees a law in the way a word is used, and, trying to apply this law consistently, comes up against cases where it leads to paradoxical results." This law may manifest itself as a proposed definition. Such definitions are often unsatisfactory (and puzzling), which, according to Wittgenstein, means that we don't use the word according to the (strict) proposed definition. Then we are tempted to think the problem is with our current definition, and we may try to find a new one.

The end of the excerpt is similar to the beginning, in that it is worth citing it here: "Philosophy, as we use the word, is a fight against the fascination which forms of expression exert upon us." 

## 4f. Words and their meanings

This excerpt begins in pp. 27 with "I want you to remember that [...]" and ends in pp. 28 with "[...] A word has the meaning someone has given to it."

Here, Wittgenstein reminds us that words do not get their meanings from "a power independent of us, so that there could be a kind of scientific investigation into what the word really means". Rather, words have "meanings we have given them". In many cases, we are not ready to give explanations of our words, as they are used in "a thousand different ways which gradually merge into one another." While some words may have strict, tabulated meanings, it is a prejudice to think that for all words this *must* be the case.

## 4g. Ordinary and ideal languages

This excerpt begins in pp. 28 with "It is wrong to say that [...]" and ends in pp. 28 with "[...] because of their absurd appearance."

In this excerpt Wittgenstein discusses ordinary language and 'ideal' ones. Ordinary language to Wittgenstein is all right, and doesn't need to be "improved" or "completed". The imagined language games Wittgenstein proposes are not meant to complete or replace ordinary language, but to reveal some aspects of it, and as a result to reveal our prejudices and temptations.

## 4h. Misleading analogies

This excerpt begins in pp. 28 with "When we say that [...]" and ends in pp. 29 with "[...] the discovery of the South Pole."

The main point of this excerpt is to point out that "the idea of an analogy being misleading is nothing sharply defined". Even a fixed word can be associated with both situations: the use of the word 'philosophy' to describe his investigations, for example, can be illuminating or misleading. An important point is that, in the cases where someone is misled by an analogy, we may express this by saying "he wouldn't talk as he does if he were aware of this difference in grammar of such-and-such words [...]". Wittgenstein provides two examples of this, relating to mathematicians: the first is the word "kind", as in "kinds of numbers, kinds of proofs", while the second is "discovery", as in "discovery of the construction of the pentagon and [...] the discovery of the South Pole."

## 5. Confusions expressed in philosophical questions

This excerpt begins in pp. 35 with "Let us revert to our question [...]" and ends in pp. 35 with "[...] in the *form* of a scientific question" 

This short, but very enlightening excerpt, invites us to see philosophical questions such as "What is the object of a thought?" as an expression of confusions, particularly about meaning/grammar of words. Wittgenstein calls such questions "metaphysical", pointing to the fact that they almost sound like questions of physics, such as "What is the mass of a molecule of CO2?". However, unlike a scientific question, in a metaphysical question the *unclarity* about the use of words in new contexts is expressed.

## 6. Metaphors and philosophy

This excerpt begins in pp. 41 with "Examine expressions like [...]" and ends in pp. 41 with "[...] the words "idea" and "expression of an idea"."

The kernel of this excerpt is the sentence "To say that we are trying to express the idea which is before our mind is to use a metaphor, one which very naturally suggests itself; and which is all right so long as it doesn't mislead us when we are philosophizing." This is a crucial remark in my view, as it doesn't reduce Wittgenstein's position into *quietism* (or, if it does, it's a quite particular form of quietism): pictures, metaphors and analogies are not something to be eliminated, but to be understood and used with a clear, commanding attitude. That may prevent us from using language in ways that allow confusions and metaphysical temptations to creep in.

## 7. Dissolving 'musts'

This excerpt begins in pp. 41 with "I have been trying [...]" and ends in pp. 42 with "[...] they must accompany them."

In this excerpt Wittgenstein is explicit about his objective to "remove the temptation to think that there 'must' be what is called a mental process of thinking, hoping, wishing, believing, etc., independent of the process of expressing a thought, a hope, a wish, etc." The way Wittgenstein proposes this is to substitute for 'thought' the 'expression of thought', and so on.

The way Wittgenstein characterizes this substitution is beyond the scope of this post. Our focus is instead on the removal of the 'must', which corresponds to a change of attitude towards certain phenomena. Wittgenstein points out that "This, of course, doesn't mean that we have shown that peculiar acts of consciousness do not accompany the expressions of our thoughts! Only we no longer say that they must accompany them."

The "must", as we saw and will see, arises from attitudes such as treating language as governed by strict rules, demanding definitions, and projecting analogies too far.

## 8. Philosophy as arranging books on a shelf

This excerpt begins in pp. 44 with "Imagine we had to [...]" and ends in pp. 45 with "[...] in their final places."

Wittgenstein offers us in this excerpt an analogy between his philosophical method and organizing books on a shelf. The books are initially disorganized on the floor. We may organize them by grouping some of them together on the shelf, not necessarily organizing them in a "definitive" manner. We may then reorganize the books by separating some books that were initially grouped together.

This analogy connects with the concept of analogy itself in Wittgenstein's conception of the word. Particularly in the PI, Wittgenstein brings to our attention the importance of *disanalogies* between words or uses of a word (language games and forms of life). Focusing on such differences may dissolve some pieces of philosophical torment. On the other hand, these orderings of language are not meant to be final or definitive, but to treat our mental discomfort.

This analogy has another aspect: if the books represent our knowledge, we see that there's no need to discover or explain anything: reorganizing what we already know may be sufficient.

## Conclusions

As there are more excerpts to be analyzed, I shall not offer a comprehensive conclusion or summarization now. Rather, I'll point out that there are certainly some patterns in *what* Wittgenstein criticizes and *how* he offers his critiques. The identification of language misuse and metaphysics is very clear in these remarks, echoing what was done in the *Tractatus* but in a radically distinct manner (at least in principle).

## References

<a id="fernandes2025"> Fernandes, H. (2025).</a>  
*A Non-philosopher's Introduction to Wittgenstein.*  
Personal Blog.
<a href="https://hilariofernandes.github.io/wittgenstein/2025/10/13/anpitw.html" class="reference-link">
  https://hilariofernandes.github.io/<wbr>wittgenstein/<wbr>2025/<wbr>10/<wbr>13/<wbr>anpitw.html
</a>

<a id="wittgensteindocherty1991"> Wittgenstein, L. & Docherty, P. (1991).</a>  
*The Blue and Brown Books.*  
Blackwell.

<a id="wittgensteinhackerschulte2010"> Wittgenstein, L. & Hacker, P. & Schulte, J. (2010).</a>  
*Philosophical Investigations.*  
Wiley.

<a id="wittgensteinogden1990"> Wittgenstein, L. & Ogden, C. (1990).</a>  
*Tractatus Logico-philosophicus.*  
Routledge.