---
title: "On Wittgenstein's Blue and Brown Books (part I)"
date: 2026-01-11
category: Wittgenstein
layout: post
---

Write an introduction

## 9a. Identity and sameness

This excerpt begins in pp. 54 with "[...] suppose I and someone else [...]" and ends in pp. 55 with "[...] "This is the same occasion...", etc.?"

Wittgenstein begins this excerpt with an imaginary situation: two people have a part of their bodies in common (say, a hand, connected to each brain by a medical operation). If the hand is stung and both people connected to it feel pain, is it the same pain? To the interlocutor who claims the contrary, Wittgenstein does not offer a refutation, but a reminder: a grammatical statement is being made when it is said that "each individual will have its own pain".

An even more extreme case (in its potential to mislead us), according to Wittgenstein, is "A man's sense data are private to himself". According to Wittgenstein, "it looks still more like an experiential proposition; the philosopher who says this may well think that he is expressing a kind of scientific truth." 

Some other examples that relate to the sameness of pain are colors of books (properties, predicates) and chairs (physical objects). Wittgenstein reminds us that sameness and identity are used in a variety of ways.

## 9b. Metaphysical and grammatical propositions

This excerpt begins in pp. 55 with "What we did [...]" and ends in pp. 55 with "[...] he didn't know of."

Here, Wittgenstein is quite explicit about his method: when we use a word metaphysically (such as 'can' or 'must') in a proposition, we show that it hides a grammatical rule: "[...] we destroy the outward similarity between a metaphysical proposition and an experiential one". Some ways to do that are to find an alternative form of expression and to give sense to such propositions by fixing empirical criteria.

## 9c. Physical and grammatical impossibility

This excerpt begins in pp. 55 with "When we say [...]" and ends in pp. 56 with "[...] which we have made."

This excerpt considers and compares a few cases of impossibility: "I can't feel his pain", "The colours green and blue can't be in the same place simultaneously", "3 x 18 inches won't go into 3 feet" and "three men can't sit side by side on a bench a yard long". The first three cases are what Wittgenstein calls "grammatical impossibility", whereas the last is a case of "physical impossibility". Wittgenstein proposes the conception that such propositions of physical impossibility create pictures that we extend to other cases (such as feeling another person's pain, or two colors being on the same place), which in turn leads to the creation of certain doctrines.

## 9d. Doctrines as objections to conventions

This excerpt begins in pp. 56 with "On wavering between [...]" and ends in pp. 57 with "[...] a great deal".

Once again, I'll quote a part of this excerpt, as Wittgenstein put it in a majestically clear way: "The man who says "only my pain is real", doesn't mean to say that he has found out by the common criteria [...] that the others who said they had pains were cheating. But what he rebels against is the use of this expression in connection with these criteria. That is, he objects to using this word in the particular way in which it is commonly used. On the other hand, he is not aware that he is objecting to a convention. He sees a way of dividing the country different from the one used on the ordinary map. He feels tempted, say, to use the name "Devonshire" not for the county with its conventional boundary, but for a region differently bounded. He could express this by saying: "Isn't it absurd to make this a county, to draw the boundaries here?" But what he says is: "The real Devonshire is this". We could answer: "What you want is only a new notation, and by a new notation no facts of geography are changed". It is true, however, that we may be irresistibly attracted or repelled by a notation."

## 10a.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

## 10b.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

## 11. Language in context

This excerpt begins in pp. 62 with "There are many [...]" and ends in pp. 62 with "[...] in former times?"

In this excerpt, Wittgenstein considers an imaginary context in which a man can only remember even days (if the current day is even), and only remember odd days (if the current day is odd), without feelings of discontinuity. Wittgenstein asks us "Are we bound to say that here two persons are inhabiting the same body?", and the answer he provides is simply: *neither*. He reminds us that "For the ordinary use of the word "person" is what one might call a composite use suitable under the ordinary circumstances. If I assume, as I do, that these circumstances are changed, the application of the term "person" or "personality" has thereby changed; and if I wish to preserve this term and give it a use analogous to its former use, I am at liberty to choose between many uses, that is, between many different kinds of analogy."

The usual attitude in the public arena regarding the question above is to pressupose the word "person" has some hidden meaning and demand a yes-or-no answer (the law of excluded middle will likely be invoked). Traditional philosophy might take a step further and provide a formal definition for "person". Wittgenstein rejects both approaches, instead reminding us that we, as a community of language speakers, control language, and the word "person" has its meaning in usual contexts (which do not include the imagined situation).

This particular excerpt, in my view, is very relevant regarding discussions of consciouness and intelligence (at the time I'm writing this post, particularly with regards to AI and LLMs).

## 12. Sense data

This excerpt begins in pp. 70 with "Philosophers say [...]" and ends in pp. 71 with "[...] in visual space".

While this excerpt covers many interesting ideas, it is centered around the concept of "sense data". Firstly, Wittgenstein suggests a way to dissolve the mystique around this term by replacing it with alternative expressions. Then, Wittgenstein points out that these metaphysical expressions have "deluded people into thinking that they have discovered new entities, new elements of the structure of the world, as though to say "I believe that there are sense data" were similar to saying "I believe that matter consists of electrons"". Wittgenstein concludes this excerpt by alerting us of the dangers of not paying attention to the grammar of this expression, and how it differs from the grammar of similar statements about physical objects.

## 13. Taking language for granted

This excerpt will be included in full, as it is very short: "We are like people who think that pieces of wood shaped more or less like chess or draught pieces and standing on a chess board make a game, even if nothing has been said as to how they are to be used."

This "final" excerpt goes full circle to what's said in the "first" one: we do not examine language attentively, realizing words have meanings and senses in the language in given contexts, which relate to certain uses we make of language. This leads us to use language in careless ways, which in turn leads us to confusions.

## 13

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

The excerpt above was the last one selected from the Blue Book; the remaining ones come from the Brown Book.


## 14a.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

## 14b.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

## 15.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"

## 16.

This excerpt begins in pp. x with "[...]" and ends in pp. y with "[...]"


## Conclusions






## References

<a id="fernandes2025"> Fernandes, H. (2025).</a>  
*A Non-philosopher's Introduction to Wittgenstein.*  
Personal Blog.
<a href="https://hilariofernandes.github.io/wittgenstein/2025/10/13/anpitw.html" class="reference-link">
  https://hilariofernandes.github.io/<wbr>wittgenstein/<wbr>2025/<wbr>10/<wbr>13/<wbr>anpitw.html
</a>

<a id="wittgensteindocherty1991"> Wittgenstein, L. & Docherty, P. (1991).</a>  
*The Blue and Brown Books.*  
Blackwell.

<a id="wittgensteinhackerschulte2010"> Wittgenstein, L. & Hacker, P. & Schulte, J. (2010).</a>  
*Philosophical Investigations.*  
Wiley.

<a id="wittgensteinogden1990"> Wittgenstein, L. & Ogden, C. (1990).</a>  
*Tractatus Logico-philosophicus.*  
Routledge.