---
title: "On Learning and LLMs"
date: 2025-10-31
category: Thoughts and Ramblings
layout: post
---

- Introduction: motivate the post by talking about my quest to retain knowledge. Talk about passive reading, anki and the limitations of each.

## LLMs

- Talk about LLMs in general (what's great about them, such as their general applicability and hability to compile information from sources in very different areas of knowledge and what makes them different from humans, such as the lack of a communal/interactive/multisensorial foundation for language acquisition, and how the "objective functions" [if one insists in saying that the human brain is just like a neural network]) (hints to Wittgensteinian thought) and their potential to help with learning (notebookLM, etc), despite their limitations (getting factual information wrong or simply allowing one to stop thinking). Talk about the two principles I have (which are to be critical of the output an LLM generates, and asking the LLM to be critical of your own assumptions), as well as how LLMs can be useful in situations where it's easier for a human to verify a solution than to come up with one.

## An LLM-powered exam tool

- Talk about the exam tool I created. Mention it was "vibe-coded" (and the upsides and downsides of this approach). Compare it with Anki. Talk about my own experience with the tool. Talk about how it's not designed for learning, but for retaining knowledge that might get lost with time. Talk about how it's crucial to use the LLM feedback as a starting point, but not get caught up in it.

## Conclusion

- Conclusion: suggest the reader to check out the exam tool if they are interested, send a positive message about how LLMs can help humans to learn, but talk about the constant need for vigilance and not getting into the habit of outsourcing one's own thinking to an LLM.

Don't forget to cite the relevant literature

review