---
title: "General aspects of statistical modeling"
date: 2025-09-30
category: Statistics, mathematics and computer science
layout: post
---

In this year of 2025, I've began reading some papers on statistical modeling. The first such paper **CITE 2001_Statistical Modeling The Two Cultures** came to my attention by accident while I was scrolling on LinkedIn. From there, using a mix of similar papers suggested by ResearchRabbit and references from the texts themselves I was able to assemble a small list of works covering some interesting and relevant aspects of modeling (as opposed to assessments of particular methods or paradigms). 

Before sharing the list of papers/books and my main takeaways from each, I'd like to briefly discuss the paper from which I built the list and how it relates to the list as a whole. Breiman's "Two Cultures" paper presents and criticizes what he sees as a divide between two quite distinct approaches to statistical modeling: i) the traditional culture, heavily influenced by the foundational works of the early 20th century, and ii) the novel 'machine learning' aproach pioneered by the computer science community in the 1980s.

Some of the papers in the collection consist in responses to Breiman's original paper. These include:

- Reinterpretations or clarifications of alleged conflations in Breiman's dichotomy: **CITE 2021_Bridging Breiman's Brook** argue that Breiman conflates data models and parametric models, whereas **CITE 2021_Causally Colored Reflections on Leo Breiman's Statistical** interpret Breiman's comparison as one between interpretable vs. uninterpretable (descriptive) models. 
- A "one culture" view, either as a characterization of the developments in the field of statistics since the publication of Breiman's paper **CITE 2020_The data science process one culture**, or as a goal that's worth the pursuit **CITE 2021_One Modern Culture of Statistics Comments on Statistical Modeling**.
- Overviews on statistical modeling, either in a compact, concise presentation **CITE 2020_Leo Breiman's “Two Cultures”** or as a more detailed and thorough review **CITE 2009_To Explain or to Predict**.

The list above, as well as the remaining ones in this text (not to mention the collection of lists itself), are not mutually exclusive: some works might ponder on multiple aspects from one list, or even aspects from multiple lists. 

Another kind of work in the list consists of papers that consider general aspects of statistical modeling. That includes:

- Discussions of model simplicity (Occam's Razor) and its tradeoffs in the KDD context **CITE 1999_The Role of Occam's Razor in Knowledge Discovery**.
- Comparisons between scientific and statistical method **CITE 2000_Scientific Method, Statistical Method and the Speed of Light**
- Key aspects of machine learning practice **CITE 2012_A Few Useful**
- Proposal of novel frameworks for statistical modeling **CITE 2020_Veridical data science**.

**TALK ABOUT PAPERS ON STATISTICAL METHOD IN GENERAL, LIKE THE SPEED OF LIGHT ONE AND VERIDICAL DATA SCIENCE (single paragraph, don't go into details)**

**TALK ABOUT CAUSAL INFERENCE PAPERS/BOOKS (single paragraph, don't go into details)**

**TALK ABOUT THE SIMULATION STUDIES PAPER**

**CONCLUSION (MENTION THE FACT THAT SOME MATERIAL IS MISSING FROM THE LIST)**

**REVIEW**







