---
title: "On Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations (part I)"
date: 2026-02-??
category: Wittgenstein
layout: post
---

This blog post is dedicated to Wittgenstein's Philosophical Investigations ([Wittgenstein et al., 2010](#wittgensteinhackerschulte2010)), in a similar fashion to my previous posts on The Blue and Brown Books ([Wittgenstein and Docherty, 1991](#wittgensteindocherty1991)). We shall go over a few key methodological remarks and provide a brief summary of each, connecting with other works at some points. Unlike The Blue and Brown Books, the fact that remarks in the PI are numbered will make our life slighly easier.

Our first remark, however, doesn't come from the text itself, but from its preface, and it says: "I should not like my writing to spare other people the trouble of thinking. But if possible, to stimulate someone to thoughts of his own." This remark can be understood in a few ways (see, for example, **CITE RUPERT READ AND WHICH PAGE/SECTION**), but I tend to take it as Wittgenstein's therapeutic voice claiming that there's no finality to his work. The liberatory approach is a living, ongoing endeavour, which loses its sense if we treat topics such as rule-following or private language as "settled" by Wittgenstein (even if we take this settling to be done in a therapeutic, non-doctrinal way).

## §11: Words as tools

The context of this remark is set up at §1, which presents Augustine's picture of language. In this picture, words are seen as standing for things (acting as names). Wittgenstein challenges this picture by setting up some imaginary language games, as well as making some considerations about meaning. Remark 11 invites us to look at words as tools, in the sense that their uses can be seen as equally varied and diverse. When doing philosophy, Wittgenstein claims, we tend to be confused by the uniform appearance of words, unlike their varied uses, which are not so obvious.

Personally, I see something similar happening in the realm of platonism (mathematical platonism, specifically). When doing mathematics, we assert things about certain objects (like existence, or certain predicates like finiteness). The appearance of such sentences reminds us of how we talk about everyday objects in the world, and this analogy makes us think that mathematical language has to be *about* something. I do not think this phenomenon is primarily at play for platonism (about chairs, for instance), but for the sake of brevity I will not extend the comments on this remark.

## §16: It is as you please

This remark concerns an imagined language-game Wittgenstein proposes earlier. An interlocutor may ask: "What about the colour samples [...]: are they part of the language?" To that, Wittgenstein says: *It is as you please*. This highlights the agency of the interlocutor/patient and how Wittgenstein sees language (not in an essentialist manner, but as something rooted in shared practices and customs). With that being said, Wittgenstein suggests that "It is most natural, and causes least confusion, if we count the samples as tools of the language". This is not some sort of ""mini-doctrine; rather, it's a proposal to us. In the end, it is as we please.

## §29: Chains of explanations and context

This remark is placed in the context of ostensive definitions, and it claims that sometimes confusions can be averted by saying "this color is called red" instead of "this is called red", and similarly for other cases, such as length. To an interlocutor who may ask "And what about the last explanation in this chain?", Wittgenstein says: "Don’t say: “There isn’t a ‘last’ explanation.” That is just as if you were to say: “There isn’t a last house in this road; one can always build an additional one.”"

To conclude the remark, Wittgenstein reminds us that "whether the word “number” is necessary in an ostensive definition of "two"" depends on a social context of language use (specifically, whether the other person doesn't understand the definition we give them, which itself is related to the context in which the definition is given, and the particular person it is given to). Moreover, his understanding is shown by how he uses the word going forward.

## §36: The spirit of actions

In this remark, given in the context of *meaning*, Wittgenstein diagnoses a source of confusion: when we cannot specify a single bodily action that is the essence of *meaning* something by certain words (or pointing at one aspect of an object as opposed to others), we conjure a mental/spiritual quasi-explanation for the phenomenon. "Our language suggests a body but there is none", or, in other words, language seems to leave a gap in our understanding, which we fill by invoking a shadowy kind of explanation.

## §38: Language going on holiday

This remark as a whole is very interesting, but our focus will be on its last paragraph. Similarly to remark §36, here Wittgenstein is concerned with the apparent strangeness or mystique that permeates the act of naming an object. Wittgenstein offers us the picture that such problems (of philosophical nature, regarding strangeness or queerness) arise when language goes on holiday.

## §47: Rejecting certain questions

The end of this remark is quite self-contained, and I'll put it here in full: "To the philosophical question “Is the visual image of this tree composite, and what are its constituent parts?” the correct answer is: “That depends on what you understand by ‘composite’.” (And that, of course, is not an answer to, but a rejection of, the question.)"

In my view, this attitude's "power" comes from reminding the person asking the question (even if indirectly) that they are taking a piece of language and applying it in a radically different or new context, a topic covered in The Blue and Brown Books **CITE my blog post on the BB**. Such an attitude could be employed to similar questions, such as "is there sense data?", "are there predicates in the world?", "can machines be conscious?" and so on.

## §65-§71: Essences of concepts

This sequence of remarks deals with philosophical problems related to *essences* of concepts. As it happens in other places of the text, Wittgenstein here addresses possible counter-questions posed by an interlocutor/patient.

The "great question that lies behind all these considerations", to Wittgenstein, is what is essential to a language-game, or what is common to all of them. Wittgenstein admits that he doesn't seek such a thing, proposing instead that there is no such common thing (or an essence) to languages. Wittgenstein then goes on to the analogy of games (board games, card games, and so on), noticing that there isn't an essence to games, but similarities and affinities. Then, the famous "family-resemblance" concept is described: different members of a family may share one or multiple resemblances to one another (eyes, gait, stature, and so on), but the fact that they don't all share *one* common characteristic does not make them not a part of the same family.

Contrary to the picture Wittgenstein proposes, the interlocutor may say "The disjunction of all the common properties is common to all of them". To that, Wittgenstein reminds us that the concept of a game is not bounded by a strict, rigid boundary. One may draw a strict boundary, but this is not necessary to make the concept usable, and will probably not match the common usage of the word (this last claim is not in the text, but runs in the same vein). When describing what a game is to someone, we may say "these and similar things are called games". The fact that we can't draw a strict boundary does not mean we do not know what a game is, because knowing what a game is is rooted in social practices, not in the ability to provide formal definitions.

## §76-§77: boundaries and color pictures

These remarks continue the discussions on exact definitions. Here, our situation is compared to two pictures, which are similar in terms of color distributions and shapes, but distinct in terms of sharpness of boundaries. If the colors blend into each other without a hint of boundaries, "anything —– and nothing —– is right." Moreover, claims Wittgenstein, "this is the position in which, for example, someone finds himself in ethics or aesthetics when he looks for definitions that correspond to our concepts."

## §81: The normativity of logic

Wittgenstein links Ramsey's assertion that "logic is a normative science" with the picture that, in philosophy, we compare natural language with games with strict rules. One possible temptation is expressed in the thought that our languages merely approximate such a game, as if "it took a logician to show people at last what a proper sentence looks like." Wittgenstein concludes the remark by pointing out to us that all these pictures and conceptions can be seen in the right light only when we attain clarity about certain concepts, as that will mean we will understand what may mislead us.

## §83-§84, §87: Language, games and doubting

This remark is in the same context as §81, dealing with language and how it is (not) bounded by strict rules. Here, Wittgenstein brings again the analogy with games, by reminding us that people may play with a ball without definite rules: they may make up rules as they go, change rules without notice, and so on. Here, the ideal of strict rules does not appear mysterious or force itself on us. It's simply not applicable.

Furthermore, Wittgenstein reminds us that, the fact that we can imagine someone have doubts about each rule in a game, making a need for supplementary rules *ad infinitum* does not mean that we are *actually* in doubt about games. The fact is that our games have finite rules, and we do understand how to play such games, despite the possibility for unbounded doubt. The same applies for language. "The signpost is in order a if, under normal circumstances, it fulfils its purpose."

## §X: theme

## §X: theme

## §X: theme

## §X: theme

## §X: theme


## Conclusions

something

## References

<a id="fernandes2025"> Fernandes, H. (2025).</a>  
*A Non-philosopher's Introduction to Wittgenstein.*  
Personal Blog.
<a href="https://hilariofernandes.github.io/wittgenstein/2025/10/13/anpitw.html" class="reference-link">
  https://hilariofernandes.github.io/<wbr>wittgenstein/<wbr>2025/<wbr>10/<wbr>13/<wbr>anpitw.html
</a>

<a id="wittgensteindocherty1991"> Wittgenstein, L. & Docherty, P. (1991).</a>  
*The Blue and Brown Books.*  
Blackwell.

<a id="wittgensteinhackerschulte2010"> Wittgenstein, L. & Hacker, P. & Schulte, J. (2010).</a>  
*Philosophical Investigations.*  
Wiley.

<a id="wittgensteinogden1990"> Wittgenstein, L. & Ogden, C. (1990).</a>  
*Tractatus Logico-philosophicus.*  
Routledge.